A) A dataset of 17448 pairs of epitope and HLA-I (pHLAs) derived from T-cell immunogenicity assays, including reactivity and T-cell binding techniques, was retrieved from IEDB, TANTIGEN v1.0 and v2.0, PRIME v1.0, LANL, HCV and recent literature. All pHLAs were curated using HLA allele ontologies, restricted to 4-digits of HLA typing resolution (ie HLA-B*07:02) and were filtered for single HLA-allele binding preferences either by mono-allelic cell lines or binding prediction to single allele among the HLA typing of the antigen presenting cell. 

B) PredIG's feature space includes pHLA-I antigenic features and physicochemical epitope features to represent the characteristics that contribute to the T-cell immunogenicity of a pHLA pair. The antigenic feature set includes proteasomal processing (NetCleave v2.0, MHCflurry v2.0 processing score), TAP transport (NetCTLpan v2.0), HLA-I binding (NOAH, MHCflurry v2.0 binding affinity and affinity percentile) and presentation (MHCflurry v2.0 presentation score) Veganized and adapted from Rocks et al. 

C) The physicochemical features are calculated against the entire epitope and against the central residues of the epitope (P4-Po) separately. The properties calculated are hydrophobicity, molecular weight, net charge and chemical stability (the latter for the entire epitope exclusively). 

D) Expanded feature importance to dissect property-specific contributions. This depicts an average of the contribution of the value of each feature in each pHLA pair and how relevant a feature is to calculate a PredIG prediction according to Shapley values. Among antigenic features, the major weight is associated to HLA binding predictors and antigen processing is the second largest contributor with NetCleave reaching the highest individual Shapley value. Thirdly, antigen transport with the prediction of TAP translocation via NetCTLpan and lastly, MHCflurry's antigen presentation score which might be shaded by collinearities with the individual metrics (binding affinity and antigen processing). In the physicochemical feature group, the degree of influence ranks molecular weight and hydrophobicity as important contributors and net charge and peptide stability with modest importances. Remarkably, the contribution of central residues reaches similar levels than to their full epitope counterparts.
